.TH IR 1 "July 2024" "ir-cli-utility" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
ir \- a cross-platform file system utility

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ir
[\fIaction\fR] [\fIarguments...\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ir
is a command-line utility for file system operations, built with a focus on performance and minimal dependencies by making direct syscalls to the underlying operating system.
.PP
The name
.B ir
is short for "indoctrinatedrecluse," the alias of the project's author.

.SH ACTIONS
.TP
.B list [\fIswitches\fR]
Lists files and directories with detailed information.
.TP
.B rename [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIsource_path\fR> <\fInew_name\fR>
Renames a file or folder.
.TP
.B copy [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIsource\fR> <\fIdestination\fR>
Copies files and folders.
.TP
.B remove [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIpath...\fR>
Removes files and folders.
.TP
.B create [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIpath...\fR>
Creates files and folders.
.TP

.B move [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIsource\fR> <\fIdestination\fR>
Moves files and folders.
.TP
.B archive [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIpath\fR>
Creates, extracts, or tests archives.
.TP
.B cat [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIpath\fR> [> / >> \fItarget\fR]
Prints file contents to standard output, or redirects/appends to a file or system clipboard using the "clip" keyword.
.TP
.B grep [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIpattern\fR> [<\fIfile...\fR>]
Searches for patterns in files or stdin (for piping).
.TP
.B find [<\fIpath...\fR>] [\fIexpression\fR]
Finds files and directories by name, type, depth, or emptiness.
.TP
.B diff [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIleft_file\fR> <\fIright_file\fR>
Compares two text files.
.TP
.B search [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIphrase\fR> [<\fIpath...\fR>]
Recursively searches file contents under one or more paths.
.TP
.B which [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIcommand\fR>
Locates a command in PATH.
.TP
.B whoami
Displays the current user name and domain.
.TP
.B tree [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Displays a directory tree representation of the filesystem.
.TP
.B du [<\fIpath...\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Estimates file space usage recursively.
.TP
.B df [\fIswitches\fR]
Estimates and prints disk space usage of all mounted file systems or drives.
.TP
.B fastfetch
Displays system information side-by-side with a stylized ASCII logo.
.TP
.B monitor
Invokes the bundled term-sys-monitor utility in a separate shell window.
.TP
.B hash [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Generates or verifies cryptographic file checksums.
.TP
.B ps [\fIswitches\fR]
Displays information about active processes.
.TP
.B kill [<\fItarget\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Terminates one or more processes.
.TP
.B fetch [<\fIurl\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Downloads a URL or queries an HTTP endpoint.
.TP
.B env [<\fIvariable_name\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Lists, searches, or formats environment variables.
.TP
.B hex [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Displays a hexadecimal dump of a file.
.TP
.B ping [<\fIhost\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Sends ICMP Echo requests to a network host.
.TP
.B base64 [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Encodes or decodes text or files using Base64.
.TP
.B encode [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Encodes text or files into base64, base64url, hex, url, base32, or rot13.
.TP
.B decode [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Decodes base64, base64url, hex, url, base32, or rot13 text or files.
.TP
.B json [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Pretty-prints, minifies, validates, or queries JSON data.
.TP
.B plot [<\fIpath\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR]
Plots numerical data in the terminal using ASCII/Unicode block graphics.
.TP
.B uuid [\fIswitches\fR]
Generates UUIDv4 and UUIDv7 identifiers.
.TP
.B ip [\fIswitches\fR]
Displays local network adapter and public IP information.
.TP
.B echo [<\fItext\fR>] [\fIswitches\fR] [> / >> \fItarget\fR]
Prints text and supports backslash escapes and file/clipboard ("clip") redirections.
.TP
.B clip [\fIswitches\fR]
Copies standard input to clipboard or prints clipboard contents.
.TP
.B math [<\fIexpression\fR>]
Evaluates a mathematical expression and prints the result, or launches an interactive REPL calculator.
.TP
.B clock [\fIswitches\fR]
Launches a fullscreen visual digital clock, stopwatch, and countdown timer.
.TP
.B text [\fIswitches\fR] [\fIpath\fR]
Formats and case-converts strings or files. If path is omitted, reads from standard input.
.TP
.B globe [\fIswitches\fR] [\fIpath\fR]
Launches an interactive fullscreen 3D terminal world globe and flat map viewer.
.TP
.B log [\fIswitches\fR] [\fIpath\fR]
Parses, queries, and aggregates statistics from log files (stdin/files).
.TP
.B life [\fIswitches\fR]
Launches Conway's Game of Life interactive terminal simulator.
.TP
.B sleep <\fIseconds/duration\fR>
Suspends execution for a specified duration (e.g. 5, 2.5s, 500ms, 1m).
.TP
.B sockets [\fIswitches\fR]
Lists active TCP and UDP sockets along with their owning processes (PID and name).
.TP
.B sort [\fIswitches\fR] [<\fIfile...\fR>]
Sorts lines from text files or standard input.
.TP
.B wc [\fIswitches\fR] [<\fIpath...\fR>]
Counts lines, words, characters, and bytes for files or standard input.
.TP
.B ln [\fIswitches\fR] <\fItarget\fR> <\fIlink_name\fR>
Creates a hard link or symbolic/soft link pointing to a target file or directory.
.TP
.B chmod [\fIswitches\fR] <\fImode\fR> <\fIpath...\fR>
Changes file mode bits (permissions) of files or directories.
.TP
.B pmon [\fIswitches\fR]
Displays a live graphical process monitor in the terminal.
.TP
.B watch [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIcommand\fR>
Runs a command periodically, displaying its output fullscreen and optional diff-highlighting.
.TP
.B nettop [\fIswitches\fR]
Displays a live graphical network traffic monitor in the terminal.
.TP
.B dua [<\fIpath\fR>]
Launches an interactive disk usage analyzer (TUI).
.TP
.B browse [<\fIpath\fR>]
Launches an interactive dual-pane terminal file browser (TUI).
.TP
.B edit <\fIfile\fR>
Opens a file in a minimalist inline terminal text editor.
.TP
.B time <\fIcommand\fR> [\fIargs...\fR]
Measures and displays the execution time of a command.
.TP
.B dns [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIhost\fR>
Queries DNS records (A, AAAA, MX, TXT, CNAME, NS, SOA, ANY) for a host.
.TP
.B portscan [\fIswitches\fR] <\fIhost\fR>
Multi-threaded TCP port scanner to scan open ports and active services.
.TP
.B mac [\fIswitches\fR] [\fImac_address\fR]
MAC address vendor OUI resolver and local network interfaces MAC addresses listing.
.TP
.B gitinfo [\fIswitches\fR] [\fIdirectory\fR]
Launches a full-screen interactive Git repository TUI dashboard.
.TP
.B path [\fIswitches\fR]
Views, adds, or removes directories from system PATH environment.
.TP
.B help [\fIaction\fR]
Displays general help, or help for a specific \fIaction\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
Run 'ir help <action>' to see the options for a specific action.

.SS list
Lists files and directories. Reparse points and symbolic links display target paths in '-> TARGET' notation.
.TP
.B -a
Shows all files, including hidden ones.
.TP
.B -s
Sorts the output by file size, from largest to smallest.
.TP
.B -t
Sorts the output by modification time, from newest to oldest.
.TP
.B -f
Lists only files (excludes directories).
.TP
.B -l
Lists only directories/folders (excludes files).
.TP
.B -h, --human, --human-readable
Displays file sizes using KiB, MiB, GiB suffixes (IEC standard).
.TP
.B --filter \fIextension\fR
Filters the list to only show files with the specified file \fIextension\fR.

.SS rename
.TP
.B -f, --force
Overwrites the destination if it already exists.
.TP
.B -i, --interactive
Prompts for confirmation before renaming.
.TP
.B --force-links
Allows the renaming of symbolic links themselves.

.SS copy
.TP
.B --force
Overwrites destination files if they already exist.
.TP
.B -r
(Default) Copies directories and their contents recursively.
.TP
.B -f
Copies only files from the source, not subdirectories.
.TP
.B -l
Copies only subdirectories from the source, not files.
.TP
.B --rename <\fIname\fR>
When copying a single file, saves it under a new name.

.SS remove
.TP
.B -f, --force
Force removes files and directories without prompting.
.TP
.B -i, --interactive
Prompts for confirmation before every removal.
.TP
.B -t, --trash
Moves items to the system trash instead of permanently deleting.
.TP
.B -v, --verbose
Prints the name of each file as it is being removed.
.TP
.B -y
Skips the confirmation prompt for non-empty folders.

.SS create
.TP
.B --create-file
Forces the creation of a file, even if it has no extension.
.TP
.B -p, --force-subdirs
Creates parent directories as needed.

.SS move
.TP
.B --force
Overwrites destination files if they already exist.
.TP
.B --rename <\fIname\fR>
When moving a single file, saves it under a new name.

.SS archive
.TP
.B --dest <\fIpath\fR>
Specify a destination path for the output.
.TP
.B --arc
(Default) Creates an archive from the source path.
.TP
.B --unarc
Extracts the contents of the archive specified in <\fIpath\fR>.
.TP
.B --test
Tests the integrity of the specified archive.
.TP
.B --format <\fIformat\fR>
Specifies the archive format (e.g., zip, tar.gz).
.TP
.B --force
Overwrites the destination archive if it already exists.
.TP
.B --verbose
Prints the name of each file as it is being processed.

.SS cat
.TP
.B -n, --line-numbers
Prefixes each output line with its source line number.
.TP
.B -s, --squeeze-blank
Collapse consecutive empty lines into a single empty line.
.TP
.B --head <\fIN\fR>
Prints the first \fIN\fR lines.
.TP
.B --tail <\fIN\fR>
Prints the last \fIN\fR lines.
.TP
.B --range <\fISTART:END\fR>
Prints a 1-based inclusive line range.
.TP
.B --binary
Prints a hexadecimal preview of the file bytes.
.TP
.B --encoding <\fIencoding\fR>
Decodes text as utf-8, utf-16, or ascii.
.PP
\fB--head\fR, \fB--tail\fR, and \fB--range\fR cannot be used together.
\fB--binary\fR cannot be used with text formatting switches.

.SS grep
.TP
.B -i, --ignore-case
Perform case-insensitive matching.
.TP
.B -n, --line-number
Prefixes each output line with its line number.
.TP
.B -c, --count
Counts matching lines instead of displaying them.
.TP
.B -l, --files-with-matches
Prints file names with matches only (no content).
.TP
.B -v, --invert-match
Selects lines that do NOT match the pattern.
.TP
.B -x, --line-regexp
Matches the entire line only.
.TP
.B -F, --fixed-strings
Treats pattern as a literal string, not regex.
.TP
.B -E, --extended-regexp
Uses extended regular expression syntax.
.TP
.B -A, --after-context <\fIN\fR>
Print N lines of trailing context after matching lines.
.TP
.B -B, --before-context <\fIN\fR>
Print N lines of leading context before matching lines.
.TP
.B -C, --context <\fIN\fR>
Print N lines of leading and trailing context.

.SS find
.TP
.B -name <\fIpattern\fR>
Matches a file or directory name using * and ? wildcards.
.TP
.B -iname <\fIpattern\fR>
Like -name, but case-insensitive.
.TP
.B -type f
Matches files only.
.TP
.B -type d
Matches directories only.
.TP
.B -maxdepth <\fIN\fR>
Descends at most \fIN\fR levels below each root.
.TP
.B -mindepth <\fIN\fR>
Does not print entries shallower than \fIN\fR levels below each root.
.TP
.B -empty
Matches empty files and empty directories.
.TP
.B -min-size, --min-size <\fISIZE\fR>
Matches files at least this large. Suffixes K, M, G supported.
.TP
.B -max-size, --max-size <\fISIZE\fR>
Matches files at most this large. Suffixes K, M, G supported.
.TP
.B -newer, --newer <\fIFILE\fR>
Matches files modified more recently than the modification time of FILE.
.TP
.B -older, --older <\fIFILE\fR>
Matches files modified less recently than the modification time of FILE.


.SS diff
.TP
.B -q, --brief
Reports only whether the files differ.
.TP
.B -i, --ignore-case
Ignores ASCII case differences.
.TP
.B -u, --unified
Prints unified-style output.

.SS search
.TP
.B -i, --ignore-case
Perform case-insensitive matching.
.TP
.B -n, --line-number
Prefixes matches with line numbers. Enabled by default.
.TP
.B --no-line-number
Does not print line numbers.
.TP
.B -l, --files-with-matches
Prints file names with matches only.
.TP
.B -c, --count
Counts matching lines per file.
.TP
.B -name <\fIpattern\fR>
Searches only file names matching * and ? wildcards.
.TP
.B -iname <\fIpattern\fR>
Like -name, but case-insensitive.
.TP
.B -maxdepth <\fIN\fR>
Descends at most \fIN\fR levels below each root.
.TP
.B -mindepth <\fIN\fR>
Does not search files shallower than \fIN\fR levels below each root.
.TP
.B --include <\fIextension\fR>
Searches only files with this extension. Can be repeated.
.TP
.B --exclude <\fIextension\fR>
Skips files with this extension. Can be repeated.
.TP
.B --all
Includes normally skipped file extensions.
.PP
Common binary, executable, archive, and document extensions are skipped by default.

.SS which
.TP
.B -a, --all
Prints all matching commands in PATH order.
.PP
On Windows, PATHEXT is used to resolve executable extensions.

.SS tree
.TP
.B -a
Shows all files, including hidden ones.
.TP
.B -d
List directories only.
.TP
.B -L <depth>
Max display depth of the directory tree.
.TP
.B -f
Print the full path prefix for each file.
.TP
.B -i
Makes tree not print the indentation lines.
.TP
.B -s
Print the size of each file in bytes.
.TP
.B -h
Print the size in a more human-readable format.
.TP
.B -p
Print file permissions.
.TP
.B --noreport
Omits printing of the file and directory report at the end.

.SS du
.TP
.B -a
Write counts for all files, not just directories.
.TP
.B -c
Produce a grand total at the end.
.TP
.B -h
Print sizes in human-readable format.
.TP
.B -s
Display only a total for each argument (equivalent to -d 0).
.TP
.B -d <depth>, --max-depth <depth>
Print the total for a directory only if it is at or below this depth.
.TP
.B -k
Print sizes in kilobytes (1024-byte blocks) [Default].
.TP
.B -m
Print sizes in megabytes (1024*1024-byte blocks).
.PP
\fB-h\fR, \fB-k\fR, and \fB-m\fR are mutually exclusive size formatting switches.
\fB-s\fR and \fB-d\fR (max-depth > 0) cannot be combined.

.SS df
.TP
.B -a, --all
Include pseudo, duplicate, and virtual filesystems.
.TP
.B -h, --human-readable
Print sizes in human-readable format.

.SS sockets
.TP
.B -a, --all
Show both listening and connected/active sockets.
.TP
.B -t, --tcp
Show TCP sockets only.
.TP
.B -u, --udp
Show UDP sockets only.
.TP
.B -l, --listening
Show listening sockets only.

.SS sort
Sorts lines from text files or standard input and prints the result.
.TP
.B -r, --reverse
Reverse the result of comparisons.
.TP
.B -n, --numeric, --numeric-sort
Compare according to string numerical value (supports decimals).
.TP
.B -u, --unique
Output only the first of an equal run (remove duplicates).
.TP
.B -f, --ignore-case
Fold lower and upper case characters together.
.TP
.B -c, --check
Check whether input is sorted; do not sort. Exit code 1 if unsorted.
.TP
.B --field <\fIN\fR>
Sort by Nth whitespace-delimited field (1-based index).
.TP
.B --separator <\fIC\fR>
Use character C as field separator instead of whitespace.

.SS wc
.TP
.B -l, --lines
Count newlines.
.TP
.B -w, --words
Count words.
.TP
.B -c, --bytes
Count bytes.
.TP
.B -m, --chars
Count characters.
.PP
\fB-c\fR and \fB-m\fR are mutually exclusive size metric switches.

.SS ln
.TP
.B -s, --symbolic
Create a symbolic (soft) link instead of a hard link.
.TP
.B -f, --force
Forcefully remove/overwrite an existing destination file/link.

.SS chmod
.TP
.B -R, --recursive
Recursively apply mode changes to directories and their contents.

.SS pmon
.TP
.B -d, --delay <\fIduration\fR>
Set the refresh delay interval (e.g. 1.5s, 500ms, default: 1s).

.SS watch
.TP
.B -n, --interval <\fIduration\fR>
Set the update interval (e.g. 1.5s, 500ms, default: 2s).
.TP
.B --diff
Highlight changes between consecutive runs in reverse video.

.SS nettop
.TP
.B -d, --delay <\fIduration\fR>
Set the update delay interval (e.g. 1.5s, 500ms, default: 1s).

.SS dua
No command-line switches are supported. Specify a directory path as a positional argument to analyze it.

.SS browse
No command-line switches are supported. Specify a directory path as a positional argument to browse it.
Interactive controls: \fBq\fR quit; \fB↑/↓\fR or \fBj/k\fR navigate; \fBEnter/l\fR enter directory; \fBBackspace/h\fR go up; \fBc\fR copy; \fBm\fR move; \fBr\fR rename; \fBd\fR delete.

.SS edit
No command-line switches are supported. Provide a filename as the only positional argument.
Line numbers are shown in the left gutter. Key bindings are displayed in a persistent controls bar at the bottom of the screen.
.TP
Navigation: arrow keys; \fBCtrl+Left/Right\fR jump by word; \fBHome\fR smart-home (first non-whitespace, then column 0); \fBEnd\fR end of line; \fBCtrl+Home/End\fR file start/end; \fBPage Up/Down\fR scroll.
.TP
Editing: \fBEnter\fR new line with auto-indent; \fBBackspace\fR delete before; \fBDelete\fR delete at; \fBCtrl+Backspace\fR delete word before; \fBCtrl+Delete\fR delete word after; \fBTab\fR insert 4 spaces (or indent selection); \fBShift+Tab\fR dedent.
.TP
Selection: \fBShift+Arrow\fR extend selection; \fBCtrl+A\fR select all; \fBCtrl+C\fR copy; \fBCtrl+X\fR cut; \fBCtrl+V\fR paste. Copy/cut operate on the current line when no selection is active.
.TP
Search and goto: \fBCtrl+F\fR opens the search bar (type to filter, Up/Down navigate matches, Enter confirm, Esc cancel); \fBCtrl+G\fR opens the go-to-line bar.
.TP
Undo/Redo: \fBCtrl+Z\fR undo (up to 100 levels); \fBCtrl+Y\fR redo.
File: \fBCtrl+S\fR save; \fBCtrl+Q\fR/\fBEsc\fR quit (prompts to save if unsaved changes exist).
.TP
Error handling: rejects directories; warns on binary files; reports save errors (permissions, disk full, file locked, missing parent directory) in the status bar without crashing.

.SS fetch
Downloads content from a URL or queries an HTTP/HTTPS endpoint.
.TP
.B -X <\fImethod\fR>, --method <\fImethod\fR>
HTTP request method (GET, POST, etc.) [Default: GET]
.TP
.B -H <\fIheader\fR>, --header <\fIheader\fR>
Custom header in 'Name: Value' format (can be specified multiple times).
.TP
.B -d <\fIdata\fR>, --data <\fIdata\fR>
Request body / POST data string.
.TP
.B -o <\fIfile\fR>, --output <\fIfile\fR>
Write response body to a file instead of standard output.
.TP
.B -i
Include HTTP status line and response headers in the output.
.TP
.B -p, --progress
Show download progress bar (only with --output).
.TP
.B --timeout <\fISECS\fR>
Per-request timeout in seconds.
.TP
.B --no-follow-redirects
Disable automatic redirect following.

.SS scrape
Alias: \fBdl\fR.
Visits a URL, finds all linked files whose extension matches \fB--format\fR, and downloads them to the destination directory.
When \fB--depth\fR > 1 the scraper crawls linked HTML pages breadth-first.
A realistic browser User-Agent (Chrome/Firefox/Edge pool) and browser-matching headers are used automatically.
.TP
\fB--format\fR <EXT[,EXT,...]> (mandatory)
File extension(s) to download, comma-separated or repeated.
Format group aliases: \fBdocuments\fR, \fBimages\fR, \fBdata\fR, \fBweb\fR, \fBarchives\fR, \fBtext\fR, \fBaudio\fR, \fBvideo\fR.
.TP
\fB--dest\fR <DIR>
Output directory (default: ./output). Created automatically if absent; must be writable.
.TP
\fB--include-video\fR / \fB--include-audio\fR
Allow video or audio file downloads. Both are blocked by default.
.TP
\fB--no-images\fR
Skip image files even if the extension matches.
.TP
\fB--depth\fR <N>
Max crawl depth (default: 1 = start page only).
.TP
\fB--max-pages\fR <N>
Max HTML pages fetched (default: 10).
.TP
\fB--max-size\fR <N>[K|M|G]
Max total downloaded bytes (default: 50M). Suffixes K, M, G supported.
.TP
\fB--max-links\fR <N>
Max links followed per page (default: 100).
.TP
\fB--timeout\fR <SECS>
Per-request timeout in seconds (default: 30).
.TP
\fB--rate-limit\fR <MS>
Sleep N milliseconds between HTTP requests (default: 0).
.TP
\fB--same-domain\fR
Restrict crawl to the start URL's domain.
.TP
\fB--ignore-robots\fR
Ignore robots.txt restrictions.
.TP
\fB--user-agent\fR <UA>
Override the User-Agent header.
.TP
\fB--dry-run\fR
Print what would be downloaded; write nothing.
.TP
\fB--overwrite\fR
Overwrite existing files (default: rename with a counter suffix).
.TP
\fB--verbose\fR / \fB-v\fR
Print per-URL decisions.
.TP
Error handling: non-http/https URLs are rejected before any request is made;
a missing or non-writable \fB--dest\fR exits immediately;
per-file errors are printed and skipped (crawl continues);
files that would exceed \fB--max-size\fR are skipped, not truncated;
robots.txt is fetched from the start domain (unreachable = unrestricted).

.SS encode
Encodes text or files into various formats.
.TP
\fB-f, --format\fR <FORMAT>
Format to encode into: \fBbase64\fR, \fBbase64url\fR, \fBhex\fR, \fBurl\fR, \fBbase32\fR, \fBrot13\fR [Default: \fBbase64\fR].
.TP
\fB-o, --output\fR <FILE>
Write output directly to a file instead of stdout.
.TP
\fB-n\fR
No padding (for base64, base64url, base32).
.TP
\fB--upper\fR
Output uppercase hex letters (for hex).
.TP
\fB--separator\fR <SEP>
Separator character/string to insert between hex bytes.
.TP
\fB--all\fR
Percent-encode all characters, not just non-alphanumeric ones (for url).

.SS decode
Decodes base64, base64url, hex, url, base32, or rot13 text or files.
.TP
\fB-f, --format\fR <FORMAT>
Format to decode from: \fBbase64\fR, \fBbase64url\fR, \fBhex\fR, \fBurl\fR, \fBbase32\fR, \fBrot13\fR [Default: \fBbase64\fR].
.TP
\fB-o, --output\fR <FILE>
Write output directly to a file instead of stdout.
.TP
\fB-n\fR
No padding expected.
.TP
\fB--separator\fR <SEP>
Separator character/string to strip out before decoding hex.

.SS json
Formats, minifies, validates, or queries JSON data.
.TP
\fB-q, --query\fR <SELECTOR>
Query path selector (e.g. .dependencies.chrono or .users[0].name).
.TP
\fB-m\fR
Minify JSON into a single line with compact spacing.
.TP
\fB-p\fR
Pretty-print JSON (default behavior).
.TP
\fB--indent\fR <SPACES>
Number of indentation spaces (default: 4).
.TP
\fB-o, --output\fR <FILE>
Write output directly to a file instead of stdout.

.SS plot
Plots numerical data in the terminal using ASCII/Unicode block graphics.
.TP
\fB-t, --type\fR <TYPE>
Chart type: \fBline\fR, \fBbar\fR, \fBscatter\fR [Default: \fBline\fR].
.TP
\fB--title\fR <TEXT>
Add a title to the top of the plot.
.TP
\fB-w, --width\fR <COLS>
Plot width in characters (default: auto-fit terminal width).
.TP
\fB-g, --height\fR <LINES>
Plot height in lines (default: auto-fit terminal height).
.TP
\fB--source\fR <FORMAT>
Source format: \fBtxt\fR, \fBcsv\fR, \fBjson\fR [Default: \fBtxt\fR].
.TP
\fB--csv-col\fR <INDEX>
0-based column index to plot (default: 0, for CSV format).
.TP
\fB--csv-headers\fR
Skip the first row in CSV format (header row).
.TP
\fB--smooth\fR
Render high-resolution charts using Unicode Braille characters.
.TP
\fB--log\fR
Apply base-10 logarithmic scaling to data points.
.TP
\fB--json-key\fR <SELECTOR>
JSON query path (e.g. .info.value) to extract numbers from an array of JSON objects.
.TP
\fB-H, --horizontal\fR
Render bar chart horizontally from left to right.

.SS clock
Launches a fullscreen visual digital clock, stopwatch, and countdown timer.
.TP
\fB-t, --timer\fR <DURATION>
Initial countdown timer duration (e.g. 5m30s, 10m, 300).
.TP
\fB-m, --mode\fR <MODE>
Initial mode: \fBclock\fR, \fBstopwatch\fR, or \fBtimer\fR [Default: \fBclock\fR].

.SS text
Formats and case-converts strings or files.
.TP
\fB-c, --case\fR <FORMAT>
Case format: \fBcamel\fR, \fBsnake\fR, \fBpascal\fR, \fBkebab\fR, \fBupper\fR, \fBlower\fR, \fBtitle\fR, \fBsentence\fR, \fBslug\fR.
.TP
\fB-w, --width\fR <COLS>
Target column width for alignment and truncation (Default: 80).
.TP
\fB--align\fR <ALIGN>
Align text: \fBleft\fR, \fBright\fR, or \fBcenter\fR.
.TP
\fB--truncate\fR
Truncate lines exceeding width.
.TP
\fB--ellipsis\fR <STR>
Custom truncation ellipsis suffix (Default: ...).
.TP
\fB--strip-ansi\fR
Remove terminal color/ANSI escape sequences.
.TP
\fB--strip-non-alphanumeric\fR
Strip symbols, keeping only letters, numbers, and whitespace.
.TP
\fB-o, --output\fR <FILE>
Write formatted output to file instead of standard output.

.SS globe
Launches an interactive fullscreen 3D terminal world globe and flat map viewer.
.TP
\fB-m, --mode\fR <MODE>
Initial view mode: \fBglobe\fR or \fBmap\fR [Default: globe].
.TP
\fB-c, --center\fR <LAT,LON>
Initial center coordinates (e.g. 40.7,-74.0).
.TP
\fB--day-night\fR
Enable UTC day/night terminator shading overlay.

.SS log
Parses, queries, and aggregates statistics from log files (stdin/files).
.TP
\fB-f, --format\fR <FORMAT>
Explicit log format: \fBcommon\fR, \fBcombined\fR, \fBjson\fR, \fBcsv\fR, or \fBauto\fR [Default: auto].
.TP
\fB-q, --query\fR <EXPR>
Filter query expression string (e.g. "status >= 400").
.TP
\fB-s, --stats\fR
Print a summary metrics report instead of filtered log lines.
.TP
\fB-n, --limit\fR <COUNT>
Limit output to top N lines.
.TP
\fB-o, --output\fR <FILE>
Redirect output/metrics report directly to a file.

.SS life
Launches Conway's Game of Life interactive terminal simulator.
.TP
\fB-f, --fps\fR <NUMBER>
Initial simulation update rate in FPS (1..30) [Default: 10].
.TP
\fB-p, --preset\fR <NAME>
Initial board layout preset: \fBrandom\fR, \fBglider-gun\fR, or \fBpulsar\fR [Default: random].
.SS dns
Queries DNS records (A, AAAA, MX, TXT, CNAME, NS, SOA, ANY) for a host.
.TP
\fB-t, --type\fR <RECORD>
DNS record type: A, AAAA, MX, TXT, CNAME, NS, SOA, ANY [Default: A].
.TP
\fB-s, --server\fR <IP>
Query a custom DNS server IP address.
.TP
\fB-x, --reverse\fR
Perform a reverse DNS PTR lookup for an IP address.
.TP
\fB--short\fR
Print only the raw resolved values (one per line).
.TP
\fB--trace\fR
Iteratively trace delegation path from root servers down.

.SS portscan
Multi-threaded TCP port scanner to scan open ports and active services.
.TP
\fB-p, --ports\fR <PORTS>
Target ports: comma-separated list, range, 'all', or 'top100' [Default: top100].
.TP
\fB-t, --timeout\fR <MS>
Connect timeout in milliseconds per port [Default: 500ms].
.TP
\fB-c, --concurrency\fR <N>
Maximum concurrent sockets to scan [Default: 100].
.TP
\fB--ping-first\fR
Ping target host to ensure it is online before scanning.
.TP
\fB--json\fR
Output results in structured JSON format.

.SS mac
MAC address vendor OUI resolver and local network interfaces MAC addresses listing.
.TP
\fB-q, --query\fR <MAC>
Search the manufacturer vendor of a MAC address.
.TP
\fB-l, --local\fR
List all MAC addresses of local network interfaces [Default].
.TP
\fB--update\fR
Download and update the local OUI vendor database from IEEE.
.SS serve
Launches a zero-configuration local HTTP static file server.
.TP
\fB-p, --port\fR <PORT>
Port number to bind the server to [Default: 8080].
.TP
\fB-b, --bind\fR <ADDRESS>
IP address interface to bind to [Default: 127.0.0.1].
.TP
\fB-c, --cache\fR <SECONDS>
Custom Cache-Control max-age header value.

.SS matrix
Launches a flashy interactive retro screensaver visualizer in the terminal.
.TP
\fB-m, --mode\fR <NAME>
Screensaver effect mode: 'matrix' or 'fire' [Default: matrix].
.TP
\fB-f, --fps\fR <FPS>
Animation refresh rate in frames per second (1..60) [Default: 15].

.SS gitinfo
Launches a full-screen interactive Git repository TUI dashboard.
.TP
\fB--source\fR <DIRECTORY>
Path to the Git repository root to open [Default: current directory].

.SS dbview
Launches an interactive full-screen spreadsheet and database table TUI browser.
Natively parses CSV/TSV files and SQLite databases.

.SS request
Launches an interactive HTTP REST Client dashboard TUI to test APIs.

.SS hexview
Launches an interactive byte Hex Editor and Viewer TUI.

.SS sysinfo
Launches a live graphical hardware resource and statistics system dashboard TUI.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
List all files, sorted by size:
.B ir list -as
.TP
Rename a file using a relative path:
.B ir rename -i old.txt new.log
.TP
Copy a file to another directory with a new name:
.B ir copy ./myfile.txt ../backup/ --rename mybackup.txt
.TP
Remove a file interactively, moving it to the trash:
.B ir remove -it my_document.pdf
.TP
Create a new directory, including parent directories:
.B ir create -p ./new/project/docs
.TP
Move a folder to a new location:
.B ir move ./old_location ./new_location
.TP
Create a zip archive of a directory:
.B ir archive ./my_folder --format zip
.TP
Print lines 10 through 20 of a file with line numbers:
.B ir cat -n --range 10:20 ./notes.txt
.TP
Search for a pattern in a file:
.B ir grep 'error' app.log
.TP
Search piped output from another command:
.B ir list | ir grep -i '.txt'
.TP
Count matching lines in a file:
.B ir grep -c 'TODO' src/main.rs
.TP
Find Rust files under the current directory:
.B ir find . -name '*.rs'
.TP
Find files directly under the current directory:
.B ir find . -maxdepth 1 -type f
.TP
Search paths supplied through stdin:
.B echo src | ir find -name '*.rs'
.TP
Compare two files:
.B ir diff old.txt new.txt
.TP
Show unified-style differences:
.B ir diff -u old.txt new.txt
.TP
Search source files recursively:
.B ir search TODO src
.TP
Search only Rust files:
.B ir search TODO . --include rs
.TP
Locate rustc:
.B ir which rustc
.TP
Print all python matches:
.B ir which -a python
.TP
Show the tree structure of the current directory:
.B ir tree
.TP
Show the src directory tree up to depth 2:
.B ir tree -L 2 src
.TP
Show all files, permissions, human-readable sizes:
.B ir tree -adps -h
.TP
Show disk usage of all directories:
.B ir du
.TP
Summarize disk usage of all items in human-readable format:
.B ir du -sh *
.TP
Show human-readable usage of all files up to depth 1:
.B ir du -ah -d 1
.TP
Show system information:
.B ir fastfetch
.TP
Launch system monitor:
.B ir monitor
.TP
Compute SHA-256 hash of a file:
.B ir hash file.txt
.TP
Verify a file matches expected SHA-256 hash:
.B ir hash -a sha256 -v <hash> file.txt
.TP
Verify all files listed in a checksum file:
.B ir hash -c checksums.txt
.TP
List active processes sorted by CPU usage:
.B ir ps -s cpu
.TP
List active processes with name filter:
.B ir ps -f chrome
.TP
Terminate a process by PID:
.B ir kill 1234
.TP
Terminate all matching processes by name:
.B ir kill chrome -a
.TP
Fetch URL content:
.B ir fetch https://api.ipify.org
.TP
Fetch URL and print status and headers:
.B ir fetch -i https://httpbin.org/get
.TP
List environment variables sorted alphabetically:
.B ir env
.TP
Format PATH directories line-by-line:
.B ir env PATH
.TP
Hex dump of a file:
.B ir hex file.bin
.TP
Hex dump of the first 128 bytes of a file:
.B ir hex -n 128 file.bin
.TP
Ping a network host:
.B ir ping google.com
.TP
Encode stdin to Base64:
.B echo hello | ir base64
.TP
Encode string to lowercase hex:
.B echo hello | ir encode -f hex
.TP
Encode binary file to unpadded Base32:
.B ir encode -f base32 -n input.bin
.TP
Decode percent-encoded URL:
.B echo hello%20world%21 | ir decode -f url
.TP
Decode Base64 file:
.B ir base64 -d encoded.txt
.TP
Pretty-print and format JSON file:
.B ir json package.json
.TP
Query key in JSON file:
.B ir json package.json -q .dependencies
.TP
Plot numbers from standard input:
.B echo "1 5 3 8 4 10" | ir plot
.TP
Plot second column from a CSV file:
.B ir plot --source csv --csv-col 1 data.csv
.TP
Generate time-ordered UUIDv7:
.B ir uuid -v 7
.TP
List active local network adapters:
.B ir ip
.TP
Query public IP and location details:
.B ir ip -p
.TP
Print text:
.B ir echo hello world
.TP
Write output to a file:
.B ir echo "some text" > out.txt
.TP
Append output to a file:
.B ir echo "more text" >> out.txt
.TP
Copy echo output to clipboard:
.B ir echo "some text" > clip
.TP
Append echo output to clipboard:
.B ir echo "more text" >> clip
.TP
Copy file content to clipboard:
.B ir cat file.txt > clip
.TP
Append file content to clipboard:
.B ir cat file.txt >> clip
.TP
Copy text to clipboard:
.B echo hello | ir clip
.TP
Print clipboard content:
.B ir clip
.TP
Clear system clipboard:
.B ir clip -c
.TP
Evaluate math expression:
.B ir math "sqrt(144) + sin(pi/2)"
.TP
Open interactive calculator REPL:
.B ir math
.TP
Open fullscreen clock:
.B ir clock
.TP
Open countdown timer:
.B ir clock --timer 5m30s
.TP
Convert case to title format:
.B echo "hello_world" | ir text -c title
.TP
Center lines of text file within 60 columns:
.B ir text --align center -w 60 data.txt
.TP
Open interactive globe:
.B ir globe
.TP
Open globe centered at coordinates:
.B ir globe -c 40.7,-74.0 --day-night
.TP
Sleep for 2.5 seconds:
.B ir sleep 2.5s
.TP
Measure command execution:
.B ir time cargo build
.TP
Query DNS records for a host:
.B ir dns google.com
.TP
List system PATH directories:
.B ir path
.TP
Add directory permanently to system PATH:
.B ir path -a C:\\bin
.TP
Remove directory permanently from system PATH:
.B ir path -r C:\\bin
.TP
Show disk free space in human-readable format:
.B ir df -h
.TP
Show current user name and domain:
.B ir whoami
.TP
Show all active network sockets with owning processes:
.B ir sockets -a
.TP
Count lines, words, and bytes of a file:
.B ir wc file.txt
.TP
Count lines and words for standard input:
.B echo "hello" | ir wc -lw
.TP
Create a symbolic link:
.B ir ln -s target.txt symlink.txt
.TP
Forcefully recreate a link:
.B ir ln -sf target.txt existing.txt
.TP
Make a shell script executable/writeable:
.B ir chmod 755 script.sh
.TP
Recursively make a directory read-only:
.B ir chmod -R 444 src
.TP
Launch live process monitor with 500ms refresh delay:
.B ir pmon -d 500ms
.TP
Watch system info update every 2s:
.B ir watch "ir ff"
.TP
Watch sockets every 500ms highlighting changes:
.B ir watch -n 500ms --diff "ir sockets"
.TP
Launch network traffic monitor with 500ms update delay:
.B ir nettop -d 500ms
.TP
Scan and analyze current directory:
.B ir dua
.TP
Scan and analyze /var/log directory:
.B ir dua /var/log
.TP
Browse the current directory interactively:
.B ir browse
.TP
Browse a specific directory:
.B ir browse /home/user/projects
.TP
Open a file for editing:
.B ir edit notes.txt
.TP
Edit a source file:
.B ir edit src/main.rs
.TP
Print access.log statistics:
.B ir log access.log --stats
.TP
Filter access.log for 404 status codes:
.B ir log access.log -q "status == 404"
.TP
Start Conway's Game of Life simulator:
.B ir life
.TP
Start Conway's Game of Life with glider gun preset:
.B ir life --preset glider-gun --fps 15
.TP
Query custom DNS server for MX records:
.B ir dns -s 8.8.8.8 -t MX google.com
.TP
Trace DNS delegation path starting from root nameservers:
.B ir dns --trace wikipedia.org
.TP
Scan ports on local machine:
.B ir portscan 127.0.0.1
.TP
Scan specific port range on target host:
.B ir portscan -p 20-100 target.com
.TP
List active local adapter MAC addresses and manufacturers:
.B ir mac
.TP
Query manufacturer vendor of a specific MAC address:
.B ir mac 00:50:56:12:34:56
.TP
Serve current directory on port 8080:
.B ir serve
.TP
Serve specific directory on port 3000:
.B ir serve -p 3000 /var/www/html
.TP
Start Matrix digital rain screensaver:
.B ir matrix
.TP
Start retro Doom fire screensaver simulator:
.B ir matrix fire
.TP
Launch Git TUI dashboard for current repository:
.B ir gitinfo
.TP
Launch Git TUI dashboard targeting custom repository:
.B ir gitinfo --source /home/user/myproject

.SH ALIASES
The following command aliases are supported in-binary for convenience:
.IP "ls" 12
Alias for \fBlist\fR.
.IP "touch" 12
Alias for \fBcreate\fR.
.IP "tar" 12
Alias for \fBarchive\fR.
.IP "mv" 12
Alias for \fBmove\fR.
.IP "cp" 12
Alias for \fBcopy\fR.
.IP "rm" 12
Alias for \fBremove\fR.
.IP "ff" 12
Alias for \fBfastfetch\fR.
.IP "ptop" 12
Alias for \fBpmon\fR.
.IP "smon" 12
Alias for \fBmonitor\fR.
.IP "ntop" 12
Alias for \fBnettop\fR.
.IP "ncdu" 12
Alias for \fBdua\fR.
.IP "fm" 12
Alias for \fBbrowse\fR.
.IP "ed" 12
Alias for \fBedit\fR.
.IP "gin" 12
Alias for \fBgitinfo\fR.
.IP "dbv" 12
Alias for \fBdbview\fR.
.IP "req" 12
Alias for \fBrequest\fR.
.IP "hexv" 12
Alias for \fBhexview\fR.
.IP "sys" 12
Alias for \fBsysinfo\fR.


.SH AUTHOR
Written by indoctrinatedrecluse.
